data for Peiris2003clinical (#102)
shedding-hub/shedding-hub: data/peiris2003clinical/peiris2003clinical-extraction.md

# Extraction for Peiris et al. (2003)

[Peiris et al. (2003)](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(03)13412-5/fulltext) measured SARS detected by real-time reverse transcriptase PCR in nasopharyngeal samples from 14 patients who admitted to the United Christian Hospital from the Amoy Gardens housing estate who fulfilled the modified WHO definition of SARS, up to days 5, 10 and 15 after symptom onset. The raw data is stored at [Shedding Hub](https://github.com/shedding-hub/shedding-hub/tree/main/data/peiris2003clinical). 

First, we `import` python modules needed:

```python
import yaml
import pandas as pd
from shedding_hub import folded_str
```

> Raw data, which is stored on [Shedding Hub](https://github.com/shedding-hub/shedding-hub/tree/main/data/peiris2003clinical), will be loaded and cleaned to match the most updated [schema](https://github.com/shedding-hub/shedding-hub/blob/main/data/.schema.yaml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We extracted the raw data using [automeris.io](https://automeris.io/) from Figure 4 (see below) in [Peiris et al. (2003)](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(03)13412-5/fulltext). The extracted data, which is stored on [Shedding Hub](https://github.com/shedding-hub/shedding-hub/tree/main/data/peiris2003clinical), will be loaded and cleaned to match the most updated [schema](https://github.com/shedding-hub/shedding-hub/blob/main/data/.schema.yaml).

[!image](patient_data.png)
```

Peiris2003["type"] = "NPS"

participant_list = []

for i in pd.unique(Peiris2003["ID"]):
    patient_data = Peiris2003[Peiris2003["ID"] == i]

    measurements = []
    for _, row in patient_data.iterrows():
        try:
            # Handle missing values safely
            if pd.isna(row['value']):
                value = 'negative'
            else:
                value = 10 ** float(row['value']) 

            # Special condition for 1.0
            if value == 1.0:
                value = 'negative'

        except ValueError:
            value = 'negative'

        # Append measurements separately for each sample type
        if row['type'] == 'NPS':
            measurements.append({
                "analyte": "NPS_SARS", 
                "time": int(row['Day']), 
                "value": value})

    participant_dict = {"measurements": measurements}
    participant_list.append(participant_dict)

```

Finally, the data is formatted and output as a YAML file.

```python
peiris2003 = dict(title="Clinical progression and viral load in a community outbreak of coronavirus-associated SARS pneumonia: a prospective study",
            doi="10.1016/S0140-6736(03)13412-5",

>             description=folded_str("This study measured SARS detected by real-time reverse transcriptase PCR in nasopharyngeal samples from 14 patients who admitted to the United Christian Hospital from the Amoy Gardens housing estate who fulfilled the modified WHO definition of SARS, up to days 5, 10 and 15 after symptom onset.\n"),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            description=folded_str("This study measured SARS detected by real-time reverse transcriptase PCR in nasopharyngeal samples from 14 patients who admitted to the United Christian Hospital from the Amoy Gardens housing estate who fulfilled the modified WHO definition of SARS, on days 5, 10, and 15 after symptom onset.\n"),
```

>             analytes=dict(NPS_SARS=dict(description=folded_str("This analyte indicates the detection of SARS RNA in nasopharyngeal, stool and faecal swabs, but only the nasopharyngeal swab values are presented.\n"),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            analytes=dict(NPS_SARS=dict(description=folded_str("This analyte indicates the detection of SARS RNA in nasopharyngeal aspirates.\n"),
```

                          specimen="nasopharyngeal_swab",
                          biomarker="SARS",
                          gene_target="unkonw",
                          limit_of_quantification="unknown",
                          limit_of_detection="unknown",

>                           unit="gc/mL",

Reviewer: This paper cited by the original paper described how the naso swab samples were processed. Essentially, 1 swab sample was transformed to 3 mL of liquid sample. Please add this either as a markdown block (recommended) or in the comment of your python code (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7108127/). 

NPA samples were collected by suction into a disposable aspiration trap containing 3 mL of viral transport medium (containing, per liter, 2 g of sodium bicarbonate, 5 g of bovine serum albumin, 200 μg of vancomycin, 18 μg of amikacin, and 160 U of nystatin in Earle’s balanced salt solution). Total RNA from 140 μL of each NPA sample was extracted with use of a QIAamp Virus RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen), as instructed by the manufacturer, and eluted in 50 μL of buffer. For isolating RNA from stool specimens, 140 μL of viral transport medium containing suspended stool was subjected to the RNA extraction method described above.
